MSC2675: Serverside aggregations of message relationships (#2675)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md

API to let clients paginate through all relations of an event.

This proposal is one in a series of proposals that defines a mechanism for
events to relate to each other.  Together, these proposals replace
[MSC1849](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849).

* [MSC2674](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674) defines a
  standard shape for indicating events which relate to other events.
* This proposal defines APIs to let the server calculate the aggregations on
  behalf of the client, and so bundle the aggregated data with the original
  event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.

## Proposal

### Aggregations

Relation events can be aggregated per relation type by the server.
The format of the aggregated value (hereafter called "aggregation")
depends on the relation type.

Some relation types might group the aggregations by the `key` property

> in the relation and aggregate to an array,

Author: ```suggestion
in the relation and aggregate to an array, while
```

others might aggregate to a single object or any other value really.

Here are some non-normative examples of what aggregations can look like:

Example aggregation for [`m.thread`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440) (which
aggregates all relations into a single object):
```
{
  "latest_event": {
    "content": { ... },
    ...
  },
  "count": 7,
  "current_user_participated": true
}
```

Example aggregation for [`m.annotation`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) (which
aggregates relations into a list of objects, grouped by `key`).
```
[
  {
      "key": "👍",
      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
      "count": 3
  },
  {
      "key": "👎",
      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
      "count": 2
  }
]
```

#### Bundling

Other than during non-gappy incremental syncs, timeline events that have other
events relate to them should include the aggregation of those related events
in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  This process is
referred to as "bundling", and the aggregated relations included via

> this mechanism are called "bundled aggregations".

Reviewer: This isn't drawing a clear enough picture, I think. Can we get a worked example of bundling?

The example later on is also not entirely clear. Removing hypotheticals and relying on non-normative examples would be best.

Reviewer 2: Have tried to addres this in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675/commits/be6b1c7c8ebff157583a77e2f82d7d23cf3ccaaf

to the client.

Aggregations are never bundled into state events. This is a current
implementation detail that could be revisited later,
rather than a specific design decision.

The following client-server APIs should bundle aggregations
with events they return:

  - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/messages`
  - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/context/{eventId}`
  - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}`
  - `GET /sync`, only for room sections in the response where `limited` field
    is `true`; this amounts to all rooms in the response if 
    the `since` request parameter was not passed, also known as an initial sync.
  - `GET /relations`, as proposed in this MSC.

Deprecated APIs like `/initialSync` and `/events/{eventId}` are *not* required
to bundle aggregations.

The bundled aggregations are grouped according to their relation type.
The format of `m.relations` (here with ficticious relation types) is as follows:

```json
{
  "event_id": "abc",
  "unsigned": {
    "m.relations": {
      "some_rel_type": { "some_aggregated_prop": true },
      "other_rel_type": { "other_aggregated_prop": 5 },
    }
  }
}
```

#### Client-side aggregation

> Bundled aggregations on an event give a snapshot of what relations were know

Author: ```suggestion
Bundled aggregations on an event give a snapshot of what relations were known
```

overload the client by, for example, including them all bundled with the
related-to event. Instead, we also provide a new `/relations` API in
order to paginate over the relations, which behaves in a similar way to
`/messages`, except using `next_batch` and `prev_batch` names
(in line with `/sync` API). Tokens from `/sync` or `/messages` can be
passed to `/relations` to only get relating events from a section of
the timeline.

The `/relations` API returns the discrete relation events
associated with an event that the server is aware of
in standard topological order. Note that events may be missing,
see [limitations](#servers-might-not-be-aware-of-all-relations-of-an-event).
You can optionally filter by a given relation type and the event type of the
relating event:

```
GET /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/{roomID}/relations/{event_id}[/{rel_type}[/{event_type}]][?from=token][&to=token][&limit=amount]
```

```
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "sender": "...",
      "content": {
        "m.relates_to": {
          "rel_type": "m.annotation",
          ...
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "prev_batch": "some_token",
  "next_batch": "some_token",
}
```

> The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

Reviewer: Can it be rate limited? Does it require authentication?

Reviewer 2: Have added this

retrying to send the relation, it should be re-aggregated when the user does so.

De-aggregating a relation refers to rerunning the aggregation for a given
target event while not considering the de-aggregated event any more.

Upon receiving the remote echo for any relations, a client is likely to remove
the pending event from the send queue. Here, it should also de-aggregate the
pending event from the target event's relations, and re-aggregate the received
remote event from `/sync` to make sure the client-side aggregation happens with
the same event data as on the server.

When adding a redaction for a relation to the send queue, the relation
referred to should be de-aggregated from the relations of the target of the
relation.  Similar to a relation, when the sending of the redaction fails or
is cancelled, the relation should be aggregated again.

One possible way clients can locally relate pending events is by their
`transaction_id`. When the target event receives its `event_id` (either receives
the remote echo, or receives the `event_id` from the `/send` response,
whichever comes first), the target event id (`m.relates_to`.`event_id`) of
any relations in the send queue will

> need to be set the newly received `event_id`.

Reviewer: I think this is covered by https://spec.matrix.org/v1.1/client-server-api/#local-echo ?

Reviewer 2: Have removed the duplication and tried to keep it specifically to relating relations to their target before the latter is sent.

Particularly, please remember to let users edit unsent messages (as this is a

> common case for rapidly fixing a typo in a msg which is still in flight!)

Reviewer: this feels like its in the wrong proposal

Reviewer 2: Have removed this and added a comment on #2676 to add it there.

## Edge cases

### How do you handle ignored users?

 * Information about relations sent from ignored users must never be sent to
   the client, either in aggregations or discrete relation events.
   This is to let you block someone from harassing you with emoji reactions

>    (or using edits as a side-channel to harass you). Therefor, it is possible

Author: ```suggestion
   (or using edits as a side-channel to harass you). Therefore, it is possible
```

   that different users will see different aggregations (a different last edit,
   or a different reaction count) on an event.

## Limitations

### Relations can be missed while not being in the room

Relation events behave no different from other events in terms of room history visibility,
which means that some relations might not be visible to a user while they are not invited

> or has not joined the room. This can cause a user to see an incomplete edit history or reaction count

Author: ```suggestion
or have not joined the room. This can cause a user to see an incomplete edit history or reaction count
```

based on discrete relation events upon (re)joining a room.

Ideally the server would not include these events in aggregations, as it would mean breaking
the room history visibility rules, but this MSC defers addressing this limitation and
specifying the exact server behaviour to [MSC3570](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3570).

### Servers might not be aware of all relations of an event

The response of `/relations` might be incomplete because the homeserver
potentially doesn't have the full DAG of the room. The federation API doens't
have an equivalent of the `/relations` API, so has no way but to fetch the
full DAG over federation to assure itself that it is aware of all relations.

> [MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/kegan/msc/threading/proposals/2836-threading.md#making-relationships) also makes mention of this issue.

Reviewer: ideally we link to the github PR rather than the rendered file as the branch name is ephemeral

> [MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/kegan/msc/threading/proposals/2836-threading.md#making-relationships) also makes mention of this issue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2836) provided a proposal for following relationships over federation in the "Querying relationships over federation" section via a `/_matrix/federation/v1/event_relationships` API
```

the relating events they aggregate into account will suffer from the same
limitation.

## Future extensions

### Handling limited (gappy) syncs

For the special case of a gappy incremental sync, many relations (particularly
reactions) may have occurred during the gap. It would be inefficient to send
each one individually to the client, but it would also be inefficient to send
all possible bundled aggregations to the client.

The server could tell the client the event IDs of events which
predate the gap which received relations during the gap. This means that the
client could invalidate its copy of those events (if any) and then requery them
(including their bundled relations) from the server if/when needed,
for example using an extension of the `/event` API for batch requests.

The server could do this with a new `stale_events` field of each room object
in the sync response. The `stale_events` field would list all the event IDs
prior to the gap which had updated relations during the gap. The event IDs
would be grouped by relation type,
and paginated as per the normal Matrix pagination model.

This was originally part of this MSC but left out to limit the scope

> to what is implemented at the time of writing.

Reviewer: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3523 😇

Reviewer 2: Can you formulate this into a suggestion or question please? :pray:

Reviewer: This probably doesn't need explicit inclusion - the links between the MSCs are formed by the comment and should be good enough.

> # MSC2675: Serverside aggregations of message relationships

Reviewer: @revidee says:

> So regarding [Handling limited (gappy) syncs](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/main/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md#handling-limited-gappy-syncs): I couldn't find any MSC Proposal handling this, is there any?
> 
> IMHO, this is the most important part, since for example:
If we received and event via sync, which may has annotations bundled into it and keep it up-to-date via local aggregation using all future `m.relates_to` events, but then go offline for a day and come back, without syncing _all_ events in-between, we end up in an incorrect state for the local aggregations of the already received event.
> 
> If we would simply use a locally cached copy of the locally aggregated event, it would not match a refreshed version from the server. Thus, in this situation, we can't really trust any local copies of events, except we query all relational events, that happened in-between. This would make "jumping back" to the locally saved event somewhat incorrect (mismatches a fresh copy from the server). And refreshing all locally saved events would diminish any possible traffic savings gained by local caching.
> 
> Only case I see in which we could realistically save traffic is an initial sync, with filters enabled to not fetch all m.annotation / ... / events, but include then in consecutive `/sync` calls. Other than that, this makes locally caching/saving events, in order to not re-query them, a step harder, since we have to be really careful to keep all the local events in sync & up-to-date.
> 
> This problem is (imho) rather drastic in bigger rooms with large amounts of daily traffic. When loading older messages we may end up loading batches upon batches of events filled with relational events only until we load a real m.text message that the client could display. (e.g. if many reactions have happened) But we cannot exclude them, if we choose to locally aggregate already received events, since we might miss some otherwise.
> 
> In that light, it almost seems more logical and traffic-saving to discard local copies all together in order to take advantage of aggregations and bundling. In that case, we can always apply a filter for the events received in `/sync` and can be sure that the data received is up-to-date. (after loading/paginating through the `/aggregations` endpoint if there is a `next_batch` present)
> 
> 
> Am I missing something obvious here, or am I correct that making local copies in combination with this MSC seems like a pain?

Reviewer 4: > So regarding [Handling limited (gappy) syncs](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/main/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md#handling-limited-gappy-syncs): I couldn't find any MSC Proposal handling this, is there any?

Correct, there is currently not MSC which proposes this behavior.

> IMHO, this is the most important part, since for example:
If we received and event via sync, which may has annotations bundled into it and keep it up-to-date via local aggregation using all future `m.relates_to` events, but then go offline for a day and come back, without syncing _all_ events in-between, we end up in an incorrect state for the local aggregations of the already received event.

Correct, the local client might not know some of the related messages without filling the entire gap. (Note that I don't think this is any different than if *only* local aggregation was done -- so I'm unsure if this MSC really changes that behavior.)

> If we would simply use a locally cached copy of the locally aggregated event, it would not match a refreshed version from the server. Thus, in this situation, we can't really trust any local copies of events, except we query all relational events, that happened in-between. This would make "jumping back" to the locally saved event somewhat incorrect (mismatches a fresh copy from the server). And refreshing all locally saved events would diminish any possible traffic savings gained by local caching.

I think this is pretty much what the gappy syncs issue in the MSC describes. I'm unsure what current clients do -- @gsouquet do you know if Element Web does anything special in this case?

> Only case I see in which we could realistically save traffic is an initial sync, with filters enabled to not fetch all m.annotation / ... / events, but include then in consecutive `/sync` calls. Other than that, this makes locally caching/saving events, in order to not re-query them, a step harder, since we have to be really careful to keep all the local events in sync & up-to-date.

This might work, but I doubt the savings in traffic would be the tremendous, unless the majority of your events are annotations, specifically. (I think you would still want to fetch references / edits / threads since the aggregation of those somewhat assumes you're going to fetch the full event anyway).

> In that light, it almost seems more logical and traffic-saving to discard local copies all together in order to take advantage of aggregations and bundling. In that case, we can always apply a filter for the events received in `/sync` and can be sure that the data received is up-to-date. (after loading/paginating through the `/aggregations` endpoint if there is a `next_batch` present)

Note that the `/aggregations` endpoint was removed from this MSC (and from Synapse). [MSC3571](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3571) includes the bits split out of MSC2675.

> Am I missing something obvious here, or am I correct that making local copies in combination with this MSC seems like a pain?

I don't think you're missing anything obvious, but maybe @gsouquet has some ideas of how the clients deal with this.

> # MSC2675: Serverside aggregations of message relationships

Reviewer: @alphapapa says:

> @ara4n @turt2live  I guess it's pointless to comment here since the proposal has been merged, but I feel like chiming in, as a client developer:
> 
> I've been reluctant to implement anything not yet in a released version of the spec, but in my client I did implement support for reaction annotations, since they're so widely used in Element and other clients already.  But now I'm seeing my client not render annotations in some cases, which I've found is because the server is now aggregating some of them.
> 
> I understand the motivations for this proposal, but at the same time, it increases the complexity of developing clients: rather than simply handling each reaction annotation event, a client must handle both aggregated reaction annotations and individual reaction annotation events.  This means that, when an individual event comes in, I have to emulate the server-side aggregation in my client, adding it to the annotated event's unsigned data myself, so that I can still have a single path for rendering an event.
> 
> Fundamentally, this means that a single logical action (reacting to a message) may now be represented in a room's timeline in two different ways: as individual events, or as aggregations of metadata on the annotated event.  So this does not seem to make it easier for clients, but rather, more complicated.
> 
> I feel like Matrix would do well to emulate the Zen of Python: there should be one, and preferably only one, way to represent a logical event in a room's timeline.  This would greatly simplify implementations on both clients and servers, which would do much to help ensure Matrix's adoption and longevity.
> 
> My two cents.  Thanks.

Instead, this proposal seeks to solve this problem by defining APIs to let the
server calculate the aggregations on behalf of the client, and so bundle the
related events with the original event where appropriate. It also proposes an API to let clients paginate through all relations of an event.

This proposal is one in a series of proposals that defines a mechanism for
events to relate to each other.  Together, these proposals replace
[MSC1849](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849).

* [MSC2674](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674) defines a
  standard shape for indicating events which relate to other events.
* This proposal defines APIs to let the server calculate the aggregations on
  behalf of the client, and so bundle the related events with the original
  event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.

## Proposal

### Receiving relations

#### Unbundled relation events

> Relations are received during non-gappy incremental syncs (that is, syncs

Reviewer 2: This implies they are not received for anything but non-gappy syncs, which is not true.

rather than sending un-bundled individual relation events.  This is called a
bundled relation (or bundled aggregation), and by sending a summary of the
aggregations, avoids us having to always send lots of individual unbundled
relation events individually to the client.

The following client-server APIs should bundle relations in the `unsigned` property of events they return:

  - `/rooms/{roomId}/messages`
  - `/rooms/{roomId}/context`
  - `/rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}`
  - `/sync`, only for room sections in the response where `limited` field is `true`; this amounts to all rooms in the response if the `since` request parameter was not passed, also known as an initial sync.
  - `/relations`, as proposed in this MSC.

Deprecated APIs like `/initialSync` and `/events/{eventId}` are *not* required to bundle relations.

The bundled relations are grouped according to their `rel_type`, and then
paginated within each group using Matrix's defined pagination idiom of `count`,
`limited` and `chunk` fields - respectively giving the total number of
elements in the list, whether that list has been truncated, and an array of

> elements in the list.

Reviewer 5: This is a bit confusing without reference to the relations endpoints below - a nod to say that this is effectively the first few results of the pagination given by the endpoints would be good (although it's in the chunked format & includes count, but doesn't include next_batch: is that intentional?)

Reviewer 2: Good point, and you're proving it as the pagination would actually happen through the /aggregations endpoint ;)

Reviewer 2: Have clarified this

The format of the aggregated value in the bundle depends on the relation type.

`m.reference` list the `event_id` and event `type` of the events which
reference that event.

The formats for other relation types may be defined in the proposals that
define the relation types.

For instance, the below example shows an event with five bundled relations:
three thumbsup reaction annotations, one replace, and one reference.

```json
{
    ...,
    "unsigned": {
        "m.relations": {
            "m.annotation": {
                "chunk": [
                  {
                      "type": "m.reaction",
                      "key": "👍",

>                       "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,

Reviewer 5: Where does the timestamp come from here?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I guess this is given more as a non-binding example of what annotations could look like, but perhaps it's better to remove it altogether and not give any examples for `rel_type`'s in this MSC?

Reviewer 2: Have removed the timestamp and clarified that this is a non-normative example.

                      "count": 3
                  }
                ],
                "limited": false,
                "count": 1
            },
            "m.reference": {
                "chunk": [
                    {
                        "type": "m.room.message",
                        "event_id": "$some_event_id"
                    }
                ],
                "limited": false,
                "count": 1
            },
            "m.replace": {
                "event_id": "$edit_event_id",
                "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                "sender": "@bruno1:localhost"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

#### Batch API for fetching events with bundled relations

> To refresh events, we need an API to load arbitrary events from the room in

Reviewer 5: I'm not entirely clear on why this is necessary: a comment below says synapse doesn't implement it anyway, so maybe this should be split out to a different MSC (or just removed for now)?

Reviewer 2: Have removed

bulk, which the CS API doesn't currently provide.  We propose extending GET

> `{roomId}/event/{eventId}` to accept a list of event IDs on the URL, e.g:

Reviewer 5: In the example, they're in the body, not the URL.

Reviewer 2: This endpoint has been removed since

      "sender": "...",
      "content": { }
    }
  ],
  "next_batch": "some_token",
  "prev_batch": "some_token"
}
```

The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

  FIXME: we need to spell out that this API should return the original message
  when paginating over `m.replace` relations for a given message.  Synapse
  currently looks to include this as an `original_event` field alongside
  `chunk` on all relations, which feels very redundant when we only need it for
  edits.  Either we specialcase it for edits, or we just have the client go
  call /event to grab the contents of the original?

The `/aggregations` API lets you iterate over **bundled** relations, and within them.

To iterate over the bundled relations for an event (optionally filtering by
relation type and target event type):

```
GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/aggregations/{eventID}[/{relationType}][/{eventType}][?filter=id]
```

```json
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "key": "👍",
      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
      "count": 5,
    }
  ],
  "next_batch": "some_token",
  "prev_batch": "some_token"
}
```

The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

> Trying to iterate over an relation type which does not use an aggregation key

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Trying to iterate over a relation type which does not use an aggregation key
```

(i.e. `m.replace` and `m.reference`) should fail with 400 and error
M_INVALID_REL_TYPE.

> To iterate over the unbundled relations within a specific bundled relation, you

Reviewer 2: is this actually used? shouldn't we be using /relations for this? seems weird /aggregations would return unbundled relations rather than aggregations...

Reviewer 2: AFAICT, this isn't used in any platform of Element, nor is it implemented [in Synapse](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/6a5dd485bd82b269e7e169c0385290d081eae801/synapse/rest/client/relations.py#L284), so removing `/aggregations/{eventID}/${relationType}/{eventType}/{key}` which returns a discrete relation event.

Reviewer 2: Have removed

Reviewer 2: Actually, synapse [does](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/6a5dd485bd82b269e7e169c0385290d081eae801/synapse/rest/client/relations.py#L359) implement it. But still leaving this out as I find it counter-intuitive that an endpoint that usually returns aggregations would with an extra parameter return a discrete event. And that no client uses it.

# MSC2675: Serverside aggregations of message relationships

It's common to want to send events in Matrix which relate to existing events -
for instance, reactions, edits and even replies/threads.

Clients typically need to track the related events alongside the original
event they relate to, in order to correctly display them.  For instance,
reaction events need to be aggregated together by summing and be shown next to
the event they react to; edits need to be aggregated together by replacing the
original event and subsequent edits; replies need to be indented after the
message they respond to, etc.

It is possible to treat relations as normal events and aggregate them
clientside, but to do so comprehensively could be very resource intensive, as
the client would need to spider all possible events in a room to find

> relationships and maintain an correct view.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
relationships and maintain a correct view.
```

For instance, the below example shows an event with five bundled relations:
three thumbsup reaction annotations, one replace, and one reference.

These are just non-normative examples of what the aggregation for these
relation types could look like, but their MSCs might end up with
a different shape, take these with a grain of salt.

```json
{
    ...,
    "unsigned": {
        "m.relations": {
            "m.annotation": {
                "chunk": [
                  {
                      "type": "m.reaction",
                      "key": "👍",
                      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                      "count": 3
                  }
                ]
            },
            "m.reference": {
                "chunk": [
                    {
                        "event_id": "$some_event_id"
                    }
                ],
                "next_batch": "abc123",
            },
            "m.replace": {
                "event_id": "$edit_event_id",
                "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                "sender": "@bruno1:localhost"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Querying aggregations

> The `/aggregations` API lets you iterate over aggregations for the relations
> of a given event, and the discrete relation events within them.

Reviewer 4: I believe you removed the form of this endpoint which lets you iterate over individual events.

```suggestion
The `/aggregations` API lets you iterate over aggregations for the relations
of a given event.
```

adds the related-to event in `original_event` property of the response.
This way the full history (e.g. also the first, original event) of the event
is obtained without further requests. See that MSC for further details.

### End to end encryption

Since the server has to be able to aggregate relation events, structural
information about relations must be visible to the server, and so the
`m.relates_to` field must be included in the plaintext.

The `/relations` and `/aggregations` endpoint allow filtering by event type,
which for encrypted rooms will be `m.room.encrypted`, rendering this filtering
less useful for encrypted rooms. Aggregations that take the event type into
account of the relation will suffer from the same limitation.

A future MSC may define a method for encrypting certain parts of the
`m.relates_to` field that may contain sensitive information.

### Redactions

Redacted relations should not be taken into consideration in
bundled aggregations or aggregations returned from `/aggregations`,
nor should they be returned from `/relations`.

Trying to call `/relations` or `/aggregations` on a redacted message must return
a 404.

### Local echo

> As clients only receive discrete relation events through /sync,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As clients only receive discrete relation events through `/sync`,
```

remote event from `/sync` to make sure the local aggregation happens with the
same event data as on the server.

When adding a redaction for a relation to the send queue, the relation
referred to should be de-aggregated from the relations of the target of the
relation.  Similar to a relation, when the sending of the redaction fails or
is cancelled, the relation should be aggregated again.

Clients can locally relate pending events by their `transaction_id`.
When the target event receives its `event_id` (either receives the remote echo,
or receives the `event_id` from the `/send` response,
whichever comes first), the target event id (`m.relates_to`.`event_id`) of
any relations in the send queue will
need to be set the newly received `event_id`.

Particularly, please remember to let users edit unsent messages (as this is a
common case for rapidly fixing a typo in a msg which is still in flight!)

## Edge cases

### How do you handle ignored users?

 * Information about relations sent from ignored users must never be sent to
   the client, either in aggregations or discrete relation events.
   This is to let you block someone from harassing you with emoji reactions

>    (or using edits as a side-channel to harass you).

Reviewer 4: This is somewhat non-trivial as it breaks the assumption that aggregations are the same for all users.

Reviewer 2: I agree that would be very nice to simplify the server implementation, but the visibility question above also already puts this into question...

Reviewer: This is a more important argument to me than history visibility: users should never receive/see events from ignored users, including reactions, etc.

Reviewer 2: I think nothing needs to be added here as I think we agree that we need to sacrifice cacheability to prevent possible abuse.

relation types could look like, and their MSCs might end up with
a different shape, take these with a grain of salt.

```json
{
    ...,
    "unsigned": {
        "m.relations": {
            "m.replace": {
                "event_id": "$edit_event_id",
                "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                "sender": "@bruno1:localhost"
            },
            "m.reference": {
                "chunk": [
                    {
                        "event_id": "$some_event_id"
                    }
                ],
            },
            "m.annotation": {
                "chunk": [
                  {
                      "type": "m.reaction",
                      "key": "👍",
                      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                      "count": 3
                  }
                  "next_batch": "abc123",
                ]
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Querying aggregations

The `/aggregations` API lets you iterate over aggregations for the relations
of a given event.

To iterate over the aggregations for an event (optionally filtering by
relation type and target event type):

```

> GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/aggregations/{eventID}[/{relationType}][/{eventType}][?from=token][&to=token][&limit=amount]

Reviewer 4: I suspect both APIs will actually land with `v1`, not `r0` since they only exist as unstable right now? I'm not sure how the SCT wants to handle these APIs though since they've existed for so long, but are technically pre-1.1.

Reviewer 2: Good point, have addressed this.

  behalf of the client, and so bundle the related events with the original
  event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.

## Proposal

### Receiving relations

#### Unbundled relation events

Relations are received during non-gappy incremental syncs (that is, syncs
called with a `since` token, and that have `limited: false` in the portion of
response for the given room) as normal discrete Matrix events.  These are
called "unbundled relation events".

#### Bundled relations

Other than during non-gappy incremental syncs, an aggregate view of relation
events should be bundled into the unsigned data of the event they relate to,
rather than sending un-bundled individual relation events.  This is called a
bundled relation (or bundled aggregation), and by sending a summary of the
aggregations, avoids us having to always send lots of individual unbundled

> relation events individually to the client.

Reviewer 6: Does this mean /messages doesn't return individual reactions or that it just provides additional info in unsigned?

Reviewer 5: I think this is answered below?

Reviewer 2: Have explicitly mentioned that relation events are always returned, just aggregations are not always bundled on the target event.

Any API which receives events should bundle relations (apart from non-gappy

> incremental syncs), for instance: initial sync, gappy incremental sync,

Author: In the thread at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849/files#r308506108:

TravisR says:

> for readers: initial sync is one where the client doesn't provide a previous batch token, gappy is `limited: true` results.
> 
> (note to us: we should put these words in the spec because they aren't there).

(wording changed to reflect clarification given later in the thread)

Reviewer 2: Have tried to clarify this.

/messages and /context.

The bundled relations are grouped according to their `rel_type`, and then
paginated within each group using Matrix's defined pagination idiom of `count`,
`limited` and `chunk` fields - respectively giving the total number of
elements in the list, whether that list has been truncated, and an array of
elements in the list.

The format of the aggregated value in the bundle depends on the relation type.

`m.reference` list the `event_id` and event `type` of the events which
reference that event.

The formats for other relation types may be defined in the proposals that
define the relation types.

For instance, the below example shows an event with five bundled relations:
three thumbsup reaction annotations, one replace, and one reference.

```json
{
    ...,
    "unsigned": {
        "m.relations": {
            "m.annotation": {
                "chunk": [
                  {
                      "type": "m.reaction",
                      "key": "👍",
                      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,

>                       "count": 3

Author: In the thread at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849/files#r289391480:

jryans says:

> Our UI for reactions currently shows the senders of each reaction key in a tooltip when hovering, but we don't get that data at the moment when bundled. Should we add it here, or should the UI query all reactions when you try to hover (likely requiring a spinner)?

BillCarsonFr says:

> We also need a timestamp for ordering (time of first reaction of this type). We could compute it from the list of source events (if we know them?), but could be useful to have it in summary.
> 
> For reference, actually the local summary created incrementally in the riotX client, we have a boolean 'addedByMe', the list of source events and local echos, and a 'firstTimestamp' for ordering

ara4n says:

> the idea for showing senders is that you should get them via the `/relations` API if you want the full list of senders, rather than proactively summarising. We can start of with a placeholder using our local cache of details, and then swap it out for the full info from /relations on hoverover if that's insufficient.
> 
> however, BillCarsonFr's point i think is that if we're to display the reactions in chronological order, we need that info in the bundle somehow. i'll add a note into the rewrite that we could include this in the bundled version.

jryans says:

> See also the thread at [#1849 (comment)](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849#discussion_r311002030).

Author: It looks like there is now an `origin_server_ts` field that can be used for ordering, and senders can be obtained from `/relations`, so I think this can be resolved now.

                  }
                ],
                "limited": false,
                "count": 1
            },
            "m.reference": {
                "chunk": [
                    {
                        "type": "m.room.message",
                        "event_id": "$some_event_id"
                    }
                ],
                "limited": false,
                "count": 1
            },
            "m.replace": {

>                 "event_id": "$original_event_id",

Reviewer 2: Should this be the target event id rather?

room on seeing a gappy incremental sync, and then re-paginate the history of
the room using /messages in order to get a consistent view of the relations
which may have changed during the gap.  However, this is quite inefficient,
and prohibits the client from persisting multiple sections of timeline for a
given room.

Alternatively, the server tells the client the event IDs of events which
predate the gap which received relations during the gap.  This means that the
client can invalidate its copy of those events (if any) and then requery them
(including their bundled relations) from the server if/when needed.

The server does this with the new `stale_events` field of each room object
in the sync response.  The `stale_events` field lists all the event IDs
prior to the gap which had updated relations during the gap.  The event IDs
are grouped by relation type, and limited to N entries for efficiency.  N
should be 100.  If the number of events with stale relations exceeds N, the
list is marked as `limited` as per the normal Matrix pagination model.  We do
not include events referenced by `m.reference` as stale, in favour of more

> sophisticated pagination techniques in future. For instance:

Author: In the thread at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849/files#r309630413:

erikjohnston says:

> I feel that not including `m.reference` here is surprisingly inconsistent TBH. If the intention in this MSC is for clients to be able to display "there are X replies to this messages" in the UI then it would be useful for `m.reference` to be included. If we want to have `m.reference` work in fancy ways I feel that we should remove it from the MSC rather than have it half specced in a way that no one would use, (though I worry that we're not implementing useful features today in the hopes that some day in the future we might finally implement fancy threading).

ara4n says:

> hang on - this isn't meant to provide the "there are X replies to this message"; it's meant to say "here are the relations you missed during the gap". Meanwhile, the next unbundled event you get will tell you the new aggregation count (in the proposed `unsigned.annotation_count` field).
> 
> I'm unclear where you'd send the "X replies to this messsage" metadata in general - we don't send it on the replies themselves anywhere (bundled or unbundled) currently

erikjohnston says:

> Oh, synapse currently bundles references in `unsigned["m.relations"]` to support that

Reviewer 4: Just a note that Synapse doesn't current implement `stale_events`.

Reviewer 2: I will remove any mention of `stale_events` as it is not implemented currently.

```json
"!roomid:matrix.org": {
  "account_data": {},
  "ephemeral": {},
  "state": {},
  "summary": {},
  "timeline": {},
  "unread_notifications": {},
  "stale_events": {
    "m.annotations": {
      "chunk": [
        "$12345676321:matrix.org",
        "$12345321432:matrix.org"
      ],
      "limited": false
    }
  }
}
```

This shows that in the gappy sync response, a given room has two events prior
to the gap which received new annotations during the gap. Therefore if the
client has cached a local copy of those events, it should invalidate them, and
subsequently refresh them as needed.

To refresh events, we need an API to load arbitrary events from the room in
bulk, which the CS API doesn't currently provide.  We propose extending GET
`{roomId}/event/{eventId}` to accept a list of event IDs on the URL, e.g:

`POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/event`
```json
{
    "event_ids": [
        "$12345676321:matrix.org",
        "$12345321432:matrix.org"
    ]
}

> ```

Author: In the thread at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849/files#r281994265:

erikjohnston says:

> We need to figure out how to send the aggregation key

erikjohnston says:

> We add a `key` query string param with the (url encoded) aggregation key

ara4n says:

> @erikjohnston why? can't we just fish it out of the event contents?

Reviewer 2: This endpoint has been left out, rendering this redundant.

...which returns an array of events with the given IDs.

  XXX: Is this implemented in Synapse yet?

#### Paginating relations and aggregations

A single event can have lots of associated relations, and we do not want to
overload the client by including them all in a bundle. Instead, we provide two
new APIs in order to paginate over the relations, which behave in a similar
way to `/messages`, except using `next_batch` and `prev_batch` names (in line
with `/sync` API). Clients can start paginating either from the earliest or

> latest events using the `dir` param.

Reviewer 6: I think this needs to define, which is the default order and what the parameters to dir are. Otherwise edits will look funky, if a server returns the events in reverse by default. While we are at it, I don't see limit, from and to mentioned anywhere. An explicit mention of them would be nice.

Synapse by default seems to return the events in backwards order, i.e. latest event first and does not accept a dir parameter currently from what I can tell.

Reviewer 5: Does https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/commit/143a70ea9739a924f29ab15c5af6f6264f6ac1fb resolve this?

Reviewer 6: Yep, looks fine now.

The `/relations` API lets you iterate over all the **unbundled** relations
associated with an event in standard topological order.  You can optionally
filter by a given type of relation and event type:

```

> GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/relations/{eventID}[/{relationType}[/{eventType}]]

Reviewer 7: Depending on how we handle encrypted aggregations, the relationType might be encrypted and thus inaccessible to the server. As that parameter is optional in this MSC and a client could just fetch all aggregated events, decrypt, and filter, this request does NOT block the path of also encrypting the relation type. Soru thought it would be appropriate to mention the thoughts on this here, though, with the conclusion that it isn't blocking or anything.

Reviewer 6: Attaching myself to this, because we had a discussion about this in #spec: https://matrix.to/#/%23matrix-spec%3Amatrix.org/%24fZGD31p5FqkWGIYTeHRR_YDwFZ6kNo0NsaJ2Ji7vj74?via=neko.dev&via=0x1a8510f2.space&via=matrix.org&via=libera.chat

Basically imo the server does not need to know about the rel_type, event_id or key to calculate aggregations. It can totally just operate on opaque values. That means it might calculate unnecessary aggregations or relations, if it precaches them, but clients would be able to obfuscate/encrypt those relation values.

One downside of that is that the server can't return different API shapes for the same query. I.e. /aggregations would always need to return the same schema. Imo that is the right way to go about it anyway, since having to switch return values for different input values can be ugly in statically typed languages and in general I think it is a bad design. Instead we should spec different endpoints for how we want the result aggregated instead of switchig in the rel_type. Further context is linked above.

Reviewer 8: I think that makes sense. I actually don't even see much point to querying based on `rel_type`. Why does the client need to ask for the edits, and replies, and reactions, and redactions... to each event? Most of them will just want to say "give me everything that references this event" and they can render the reactions, edits...

I think the only think right now that most clients don't ask for is replies to an event, but honestly that could be useful as a client could indicate that there is a reply somewhere (especially if we get threading, but that may want a full thread returned as mentioned anyways...) Either way the amount of data that references a particular event is probably fairly small anyways so the overhead is small.

The only use case we miss out is "aggregations" such as the server summarizing the reactions into `Map[Type => Count]` but every clients wants to show *who* did each reaction anyways so I don't think we have a real use case for aggregations yet and would happily defer that.

Reviewer 2: Resolving this given that encrypted relations are out of scope for this MSC.

```

```json
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "sender": "...",
      "content": { }
    }
  ],
  "next_batch": "some_token",
  "prev_batch": "some_token"
}
```

The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

  FIXME: we need to spell out that this API should return the original message
  when paginating over `m.replace` relations for a given message.  Synapse
  currently looks to include this as an `original_event` field alongside
  `chunk` on all relations, which feels very redundant when we only need it for
  edits.  Either we specialcase it for edits, or we just have the client go

>   call /event to grab the contents of the original?

Author: In the thread at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849/files#r308625636:

bwindels says:

> We would need a way for `/event` to not do server-side aggregation in that case, e.g. not replace the content with the latest edit. That's why we went with this solution, as all other endpoints are assumed to be doing server-side aggregation of the content for edits.

ara4n says:

> oh, right, i see. then how about making it optional when querying /relations?

bwindels says:

> you mean like a `include_original_event` query param? Yeah, that would work.

ara4n says:

> anoadragon453, erikjohnston wdyt?

erikjohnston says:

>Could do, though I would be fine with just always including the original event TBH, its not that much extra data for an endpoint that isn't on a hot path.

ara4n says:

> it's quite a hot path though - for instance, every time you hover over a message with reactions, your client will go and try to pull the full reaction list to formulate an accurate tooltip. do you really want to re-download the event every time too?

erikjohnston says:

> Getting the list of reactions is already going to contain a bunch of events anyway, including one more isn't going to be the end of the world. Also, didn't client folk request we included some `sender` fields in the bundled aggregations so that they didn't have to do a HTTP request to render the tooltip?

ara4n says:

they did, but i'm not convinced that it's a disaster to do a separate query to /relations to get the details? jryans how much do you want the server to calculate an aggregated label for you? it feels like this could be another refinement in future (the equivalent of LLing)

jryans says:

> I'm trying to think through the implications of not having the senders in bundled data...
> 
>     * For non-gappy incremental syncs, we receive the full relation, so we can store and display those senders
> 
>     * For other event receive paths (initial sync, gappy incremental sync, /messages, /context), we won't get the senders
> 
> 
> This means for recent reactions while your client has been alive in the room, we should have the senders already. For all other cases, we may be missing some or all senders, so the reaction tooltip will need to show a spinner and request `/relations` to complete the sender list. If we think that UX is okay for now, then it resolves this spec question from my perspective.

uhoreg says:

> Was this question ever resolved on the implementation side? If so, can we get the result written up in the MSC?

Reviewer 5: *prod* - would be good to know the current status of this in the impl

Reviewer 4: The description in the FIXME is accurate to the implementation!

Reviewer 5: Thanks - who has the con on updating this? Personally it feels like this would be a thing that belongs in an `m.replace` MSC rather than this one?

Reviewer 2: I'm mentioned it here, but also made a node to mention it in #2676

GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/aggregations/{eventID}[/{relationType}][/{eventType}][?filter=id]
```

```json
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "key": "👍",
      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
      "count": 5,
    }
  ],
  "next_batch": "some_token",
  "prev_batch": "some_token"
}
```

The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

Trying to iterate over an relation type which does not use an aggregation key
(i.e. `m.replace` and `m.reference`) should fail with 400 and error
M_INVALID_REL_TYPE.

To iterate over the unbundled relations within a specific bundled relation, you
use the following API form, identifying the bundle based on its `key`
(therefore this only applies to `m.annotation`, as it is the only current
`rel_type` which groups relations via `key`).

```
GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/aggregations/{eventID}/${relationType}/{eventType}/{key}
```

e.g.

```
GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/!asd:matrix.org/aggregations/$1cd23476/m.annotation/m.reaction/👍
```

```json
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "sender": "...",
      "content": { }
    },
  ],
  "next_batch": "some_token",
  "prev_batch": "some_token"
}
```

> ### Redactions

Reviewer 2: It should mention here that redacting a relation should exclude it from the server-side aggregation for the relation target event.

Trying to call `/relations` or `/aggregations` on a redacted message must return

> a 404.

Author: In the thread at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849/files#r361335368:

tulir says:

> Assuming I didn't misunderstand something, this makes absolutely no sense. It doesn't prevent you from getting the relations, it just makes it pointlessly more difficult. In addition to that, looking at the reactions or replies of a redacted message should absolutely be allowed.

Reviewer 2: @clokep how is this currently implemented?

Reviewer 4: Right now `/relations/{eventId}` and `/aggregations/{eventId}` for a redacted event returns an empty pagination `chunk`.

It seems that iterating the relations in a bundled aggregation `/aggregations/{eventId}/[/{relationType}][/{eventType}]` doesn't do this check at all.

We should definitely be consistent about the three and probably consistent with other similar APIs (if there are any?)

Reviewer 2: The spec doesn't really mention whether redacted events should be left out, but from testing on matrix.org, both `/context` and `/messages` leave redacted events in. I agree with Tulir that this is the desired behaviour (for one, it helps clients find overlap with the parts of the timeline they already know about).

What do you think @clokep? Should we:
 - not special case redacted relation target events to be (seemingly, AFAICT) in line with /messages and /context, and change Synapse according that that change in this MSC.
 - OR focus on documenting the current (Synapse) behaviour, even though we agree it is undesirable.

Reviewer 4: > not special case redacted relation target events to be (seemingly, AFAICT) in line with /messages and /context, and change Synapse according that that change in this MSC.

I suspect being consistent with `/messages` and `/context` is better. Synapse is already internally inconsistent so we'll need to make changes there anyway.

Reviewer 2: Have clarified this.

## Proposal

### Aggregations

Relation events can be aggregated per `rel_type` by the server.
The format of the aggregated value (hereafter called "aggregation")
in the bundle depends on the relation type.

Some `rel_type`s might additionally group the aggregations by the `key` property
in the relation and aggregate to an array,
others might aggregate to a single object or any other value really.

#### Bundled aggregations

Other than during non-gappy incremental syncs, events that have other events
relate to it should bundle the aggregation of those related events
in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  These are called
bundled aggregations, and by sending a summary of the relations,
avoids us having to always send lots of individual relation events
to the client.

Here's an example of what that can look like for some ficticious `rel_type`s:

```json
{
  "event_id": "abc",
  "unsigned": {
    "m.relations": {
      "some_rel_type": { "some_aggregated_prop": true },
      "other_rel_type": { "other_aggregated_prop": 5 },
    }
  }
}
```

The following client-server APIs should bundle aggregations
with events they return:

  - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/messages`

>   - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/context`

Reviewer 4: For both `/messages` and `/context` Synapse does *not* bundle aggregations for state events (just like it doesn't bundle them for `/state`). Not sure if we should add that in here?

I think generally relations to state events are not supported, but not sure if any MSC makes that explicit or if it just doesn't really make sense.

Reviewer 4: (I guess this applies to `/sync` too if we wanted to be consistent.)

Reviewer 4: Thinking on this a little more, we should probably consistently never return these for state events or return them for all events.

MSC2674 does not forbid relations to state events, so I think the synapse implementation does this as an optimization? Not a huge deal either way, but would be good to have a decision.

Reviewer 2: I guess MSC 2674 could have mentioned that you can't relate to state events, but it's merged now ...

I've added a mention here that state events never bundle aggregations. Sufficient?

Reviewer 4: Seems reasonable to me.

relationships and maintain a correct view.

Instead, this proposal seeks to solve this problem by defining APIs to let the
server calculate the aggregations on behalf of the client, and so bundle the
aggregated data with the original event where appropriate. It also proposes an
API to let clients paginate through all relations of an event.

This proposal is one in a series of proposals that defines a mechanism for
events to relate to each other.  Together, these proposals replace
[MSC1849](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849).

* [MSC2674](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674) defines a
  standard shape for indicating events which relate to other events.
* This proposal defines APIs to let the server calculate the aggregations on
  behalf of the client, and so bundle the aggregated data with the original
  event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.

## Proposal

### Aggregations

> 

Reviewer 2: There's also /relations though (which you pointed out feels slightly out of scope)

> 

Reviewer 9: > There's also /relations though (which you pointed out feels slightly out of scope)

that might be a plausible argument if *all* the stuff about aggregations was under the "aggregations" heading, but it's really not.

> 

Reviewer 2: > that might be a plausible argument if _all_ the stuff about aggregations was under the "aggregations" heading, but it's really not.

I've tried to make this so, and have restructured the headers to reflect this. Lmk if this works for you

> 

Reviewer 9: grumble. I'd say that "End to end encryption" and "Redactions" are also part of "aggregations", but it's better. thanks.

Relation events can be aggregated per `rel_type` by the server.
The format of the aggregated value (hereafter called "aggregation")
in the bundle depends on the relation type.

> Some `rel_type`s might additionally group the aggregations by the `key` property

Reviewer 2: there is no difference, it's just a reminder which field is used to determine the relation type.

in the relation and aggregate to an array,

> others might aggregate to a single object or any other value really.

Reviewer 9: some examples here would really help my understanding, even though it would be non-normative. I think `m.annotation` is an example of a rel type that groups by key, whereas `m.replace` is an example that aggregates to a single object?

Reviewer 2: Have added examples

#### Bundled aggregations

Other than during non-gappy incremental syncs, timeline events that have other
events relate to it should bundle the aggregation of those related events

> in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  These are called

Reviewer 2: Indeed documenting the existing state, not sure what the rationale was at the time, but looking at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3171/files#diff-2f4a093e1bce3b08fb198ee1698c230c5c9303162f06b18bc9cc305e10f27069R403 I'm also not sure when the usage of `m.` as a prefix is recommended.

> in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  These are called

Reviewer 9: the CNSIG is really meant for things that are very likely to be extended by client/server implementations. Event types are a good example; the contents of `unsigned` is not, really (particularly given everything else in `unsigned` does not use a prefix).

Part of me wants to fix this before it gets too much worse. I guess we could make synapse return *both* `m.relations` and `relations` for a while, and then make sure the clients get switched over to `relations`. It's a bit of a long game at this point though :(.

> in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  These are called

Reviewer 2: > Part of me wants to fix this before it gets too much worse. I guess we could make synapse return _both_ `m.relations` and `relations` for a while, and then make sure the clients get switched over to `relations`. It's a bit of a long game at this point though :(.

That's reasonable, but can we please not do that here an stick to documenting usage in the ecosystem?

> in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  These are called

Reviewer 2: Also, I think the room summary added with lazy loading room members does something similar with the `m.heroes`, `m.invited_member_count` and `m.joined_member_count` fields. Not sure if those are different somehow or they have the same problem?

> in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  These are called

Reviewer 9: >   That's reasonable, but can we please not do that here and stick to documenting usage in the ecosystem?

yes, fair.

> Also, I think the room summary added with lazy loading room members does something similar with the `m.heroes`, `m.invited_member_count` and `m.joined_member_count` fields. Not sure if those are different somehow or they have the same problem?

I wouldn't have chosen to use `m.` prefixes there, but at least they appear within a `summary` object where *all* the keys are namespaced. The thing that is particularly objectionable about `m.relations` is it means that a single object (`unsigned`) contains a *mix* of namespaced and unnamespaced identifiers.

> in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  These are called

Reviewer 2: Have split this out into https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3572

bundled aggregations, and by sending a summary of the relations,
avoids us having to always send lots of individual relation events
to the client.

> State events never bundle aggregations.

Reviewer 2: Because synapse doesn't implement this, see  see https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675#discussion_r760269297 . We're documenting the existing implementation(s), for better or worse.

Here's an example of what that can look like for some ficticious `rel_type`s:

```json
{
  "event_id": "abc",
  "unsigned": {
    "m.relations": {
      "some_rel_type": { "some_aggregated_prop": true },
      "other_rel_type": { "other_aggregated_prop": 5 },
    }
  }
}
```

The following client-server APIs should bundle aggregations
with events they return:

  - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/messages`

>   - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/context`
>   - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}`

Reviewer 4: Just to be consistent:

```suggestion
  - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/context/{eventId}`
  - `GET /rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}`
```

  - `GET /sync`, only for room sections in the response where `limited` field
    is `true`; this amounts to all rooms in the response if 
    the `since` request parameter was not passed, also known as an initial sync.
  - `GET /relations`, as proposed in this MSC.

Deprecated APIs like `/initialSync` and `/events/{eventId}` are *not* required
to bundle aggregations.

The bundled aggregations are grouped according to their `rel_type`.

> 

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it be "Pagination of aggregations" given that bundling only happens on an event?

> 

Reviewer 9: well no, this section seems to be specifically talking about how the bundling process deals with the case that there are too many aggregations to bundle. Maybe `Limiting the size of bundled aggregations` is more accurate?

> 

Reviewer 2: I've moved any mention of pagination limiting the size to #3571

For relation types that aggregate to an array, future MSCs could opt to 

> paginate within each group using Matrix's defined pagination idiom of

Reviewer 2: This MSC doesn't specify any values for `rel_type` in the relation, and hence no aggregation formats that are specific to the `rel_type`.

OTOH, we did come up with a pattern that seems sensible to use for pagination (and that is partially implemented in Synapse IIRC), so I opted to suggest it here, so that the work does not get lost.

Perhaps it would be better to remove this though and leave it up to the first MSC needing pagination to introduce this.

> paginate within each group using Matrix's defined pagination idiom of

Reviewer 9: > This MSC doesn't specify any values for `rel_type` in the relation, and hence no aggregation formats that are specific to the `rel_type`.

I'm afraid I don't understand this sentence, but maybe I don't need to.

If this stuff isn't happening yet, suggest you move it to the "Future extensions" section.

> paginate within each group using Matrix's defined pagination idiom of

Reviewer 2: I've moved all the pagination bits (including /aggregations) to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3571

These are just non-normative examples of what the aggregation for these
relation types could look like, and their MSCs might end up with
a different shape, take these with a grain of salt.

```json
{
    ...,
    "unsigned": {
        "m.relations": {
            "m.replace": {
                "event_id": "$edit_event_id",
                "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                "sender": "@bruno1:localhost"
            },
            "m.reference": {
                "chunk": [
                    {
                        "event_id": "$some_event_id"
                    }
                ],
            },
            "m.annotation": {
                "chunk": [
                  {
                      "type": "m.reaction",
                      "key": "👍",
                      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                      "count": 3
                  }
                  "next_batch": "abc123",
                ]
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Querying aggregations

The `/aggregations` API lets you iterate over aggregations for the relations
of a given event.

To iterate over the aggregations for an event (optionally filtering by

> relation type and target event type):

Reviewer 2: > (perhaps you mean relating event type?)

I do indeed, fixed.

```

> GET /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/{roomID}/aggregations/{eventID}[/{relationType}][/{eventType}][?from=token][&to=token][&limit=amount]

Reviewer 2: Good point, I suspect it was originally added to mirror `/messages`. The only value I can think off is the `prev_batch` token from a previous invocation of this endpoint, but I don't really see how that is useful either.

I have removed the `to` query parameter and the `prev_batch` response field both for /aggregations and /relations.

```

This is just non-normative example of what the aggregation for this
relation types could look like, and its MSCs might end up with
a different shape, take this with a grain of salt.

```json
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "key": "👍",
      "count": 5,
    }

>   ],

Reviewer 2: That is an excellent point. In practice, synapse only returns the aggregation for `m.annotation` when the rel_type is omitted, and when another rel_type than `m.annotation` is provided, it returns an error (with the wrong error code, it should be `M_INVALID_REL_TYPE`):
```json
{"errcode":"M_UNKNOWN","error":"Relation type must be 'm.annotation'"}
```

I think the easiest solution is make rel_type mandatory.

  "next_batch": "some_token",

>   "prev_batch": "some_token"

Reviewer 2: Have removed this :+1:

}
```

The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

The `from`, `to` and `limit` query parameters are used for pagination, and work
just like described for the `/messages` endpoint.

Trying to iterate over an relation type which does not use an aggregation key

> (i.e. `m.replace` and `m.reference`) should fail with 400 and error

Reviewer 2: They do aggregate, but just not to an array. There are some voices that the `key` field should be used in all relation types that group on a key like annotations do, hence the generic language here.

`M_INVALID_REL_TYPE`.

### Querying relations

> A single event can have lots of associated relations, and we do not want to
> overload the client by including them all bundled with the related-to event
> like we do for aggregations. Instead, we provide a new `/relations` API in
> order to paginate over the relations, which behaves in a similar way to
> `/messages`, except using `next_batch` and `prev_batch` names
> (in line with `/sync` API).

Reviewer 9: Somehow the first sentence here made me question everything that I'd understood so far about this MSC. It's kinda factually correct, whilst apparently approaching the problem from an odd direction. Isn't this "too much data" problem the entire reason aggregations exist?

How about:
```suggestion
To allow clients to get more detail on the relationships of a given event, we 
provide a new `/relations` API, which  behaves in a similar way to
`/messages`, except using `next_batch` and `prev_batch` names
(in line with `/sync` API).
```

Reviewer 2: Unsure what part is confusing, but possibly it stems from the misconception that aggregations and discrete relation events serve the same purpose for a client, the latter just being more verbose than the former?

If so, aggregations don't always provide all the information that a client could want from relations of a given type.
For example: the aggregation for `m.thread` will just provide some information about the thread (amount of messages, ...) but not all the messages. Receiving all these events up front when the thread head is synced but hasn't been expanded yet would be wasteful. Once the thread is expanded to show the messages, we use /relations. This is what is being alluded to in the above paragraph.

If that wasn't what confused you, could you elaborate?

Reviewer 9: > the misconception that aggregations and discrete relation events serve the same purpose for a client, the latter just being more verbose than the former?

Not quite the words you used, but my assumption/understanding is that, if it we had infinite bandwidth/processing power, we could give clients all the relations (allowing clients to maintain the reaction counts/keep track of threads themselves) and not bother with aggregations at all. The reason we have aggregations is that we do *not* have infinite bandwidth and processing power.  I hope that's correct.

The phrasing "we do not want to include them [relations] like we do for aggregations" implies to me that, even if we *did* include the relations, we would still *also* want to include the aggregations (which in turn implies that aggregations must contain extra data that can't be gleaned from the relations themselves).

The `/relations` API returns the discrete relation events
associated with an event that the server is aware of
in standard topological order. Note that events may be missing,
see [limitations](#servers-might-not-be-aware-of-all-relations-of-an-event).  You can optionally
filter by a given type of relation and event type:

```

> GET /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/{roomID}/relations/{eventID}[/{relationType}[/{eventType}]][?from=token][&to=token][&limit=amount]

Reviewer 9: presumably `relationType` and `eventType` work the same way as for `/aggregations`?

Reviewer 2: Indeed. Does `You can optionally filter by a given type of relation and event type` above not explain sufficiently?

```

```json
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "sender": "...",
      "content": { }
    }

>   ],

Reviewer 9: again: how do we know the `rel_type` here?

Reviewer 2: have made rel_type mandatory

Reviewer 9: this doesn't appear to have happened: the URL still has `relationType` in square brackets, and the text says "you can optionally filter by a given type of relation and event type".

Reviewer 4: Won't the content include the relation type? This is iterating through events, so I see no reason it can't be optional?

Reviewer 9: @clokep makes an excellent point.

(It would probably help if the `content` was fleshed out a bit more in the example).

so should `rel_type` be mandatory? it doesn't seem to be in synapse's implementation.

Reviewer 4: I can't immediately think of a use-case for not providing it, but I don't see why it would be mandatory.

The only vague use-case I can think of is if you want to see all data that went into rendering of a single event, including all of those events which relate to it in any way. I'm not sure if that's something clients will actually do though.

Reviewer 9: in general I'd favour speccing what we *know* we need, and opening it up later if it turns out to be necessary, but I'm also in favour of speccing what's implemented, so if we chose to restrict it, I'd be keen that we change the synapse impl to require `rel_type`.

Reviewer 4: I do plan to ensure Synapse implements what's in the MSC! 👍

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I'm also torn, but I think being able to fetch all the relations of an event feels like it's generally useful enough, so I'll make it optional again.

just like described for the `/messages` endpoint.

Note that [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676)
adds the related-to event in `original_event` property of the response.
This way the full history (e.g. also the first, original event) of the event
is obtained without further requests. See that MSC for further details.

### End to end encryption

Since the server has to be able to aggregate relation events, structural
information about relations must be visible to the server, and so the
`m.relates_to` field must be included in the plaintext.

A future MSC may define a method for encrypting certain parts of the
`m.relates_to` field that may contain sensitive information.

### Redactions

Redacted relations should not be taken into consideration in
bundled aggregations or aggregations returned from `/aggregations`,
nor should they be returned from `/relations`.

Requesting `/relations` or `/aggregations` on a redacted event should
still return any existing relation events, and aggregations respectively.
This is in line with other APIs like `/context` and `/messages`.

### Local echo

> As clients only receive discrete relation events through `/sync`,

Reviewer 9: huh. I thought that `/sync` returned aggregations?

Reviewer 2: Agreed this is not clear, but AIUI, this is talking about how to deal with this scenario:

 - receive event through sync with 5 👍 reactions in the bundled aggregation
 - receive another 👍 m.reaction relation through sync for the previous event

The client should show a reaction count of 6, 5 from the aggregation and 1 of a relation it received through sync at a later point in time.

Reviewer 2: I'll rewrite this paragraph and put it under a "Local aggregation" header.

Reviewer 2: Have done this, let me know if it's clearer now.

Reviewer 9: definitely better now, thanks!

> As clients only receive discrete relation events through `/sync`,
> they need to locally aggregate these relation events for their parent event,
> on top of any server-side aggregation that might have already happened,
> to get a complete picture of the aggregations for a given parent event,
> as a client might not be aware of all relations for an event. Local aggregation

Reviewer 9: Long sentence is very long. I think the final clause confuses more than it clarifies?

```suggestion
As clients only receive discrete relation events through `/sync`,
they need to locally aggregate these relation events for their parent event,
on top of any server-side aggregation that might have already happened,
to get a complete picture of the aggregations for a given parent event,
Local aggregation
```

Reviewer 2: Have rewritten this, lmk if it's more understandable now

Reviewer 9: yeah, definitely better now. thanks!

should thus also take the `m.relation` data in the `unsigned` of the parent
event into account if it has been sent already. The aggregation algorithm is the
same as the one described here for the server.

For the best possible user experience, clients should also include unsent
relations into the local aggregation. When adding a relation to the send
queue, clients should locally aggregate it into the relations of the parent

> event, ideally regardless of the parent event having an `event_id` already or

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
event, ideally regardless of the parent event having received an `event_id` already or
```

```
GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/aggregations/{eventID}/${relationType}/{eventType}/{key}
```

e.g.

```
GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/!asd:matrix.org/aggregations/$1cd23476/m.annotation/m.reaction/👍
```

```json
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "sender": "...",
      "content": { }
    },
  ],
  "next_batch": "some_token",
  "prev_batch": "some_token"
}
```

### End to end encryption

Since the server has to be able to bundle related events, structural
information about relations must be visible to the server, and so the
`m.relates_to` field must be included in the plaintext.

A future MSC may define a method for encrypting certain parts of the

> `m.relates_to` field that may contain sensitive information.

Reviewer 2: [tulir says](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674#discussion_r451168542):
> Wouldn't it be better to include `m.relates_to` in both the plaintext and ciphertext to prevent servers from faking things like replies?
> 
> It should be a fairly painless migration: just start including it in the ciphertext and ignore the plaintext version if it exists in the ciphertext.

Reviewer 6: One issue with that is, if a client is allowing edits of pending messages. Then it may be hard to decrypt the pending message again to fix the relation...

Reviewer 2: @kevincox also [said](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674#discussion_r625431244):

> The other option would be signing the relation but that seems more complex and not worth it as we would expect that relations are often small.
> 
> The duplication also leaves open interesting possibilities such as adding additional context to the relationship in the ciphertext but omitting it in the relationship the server sees. This way you can have rich information without leaking it to the server. This would solve the "future MSC" issue in the following paragraph IIUC.
> 
> Another interesting feature would be client-only relationships. Obviously you can't have server support for indexing but for high-security scenarios this may be desired. However the tradeoffs with that would easily be a big MSC on its own.

Reviewer 2: We're focussing on documenting what is being used in the wild, so punting this for now.

> need to be set the newly received `event_id`.

Reviewer 9: this feels a bit like we're mandating one possible implementation - isn't it up to the client implementation to figure out how best to make the numbers match up?

Perhaps we could prefix this with words like "Here is one possible implementation:" ?

   the client, either in aggregations or discrete relation events.
   This is to let you block someone from harassing you with emoji reactions

>    (or using edits as a side-channel to harass you).

Reviewer 9: it might be worth adding a note here to make it explicit that this means that different users may see different aggregations (and hence different reaction counts) on the same event.

Reviewer 2: Have added a specific note :+1:

## Limitations

### Servers might not be aware of all relations of an event

The response of `/relations` might be incomplete because the homeserver
potentially doesn't have the full DAG of the room. The federation API doens't
have an equivalent of the `/relations` API, so has no way but to fetch the
full DAG over federation to assure itself that it is aware of all relations.

[MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/kegan/msc/threading/proposals/2836-threading.md#making-relationships) also makes mention of this issue.

### Event type based aggregation and filtering won't work well in encrypted rooms

The `/relations` and `/aggregations` endpoint allow filtering by event type,
which for encrypted rooms will be `m.room.encrypted`, rendering this filtering
less useful for encrypted rooms. Aggregations that take the event type into

> account of the relation will suffer from the same limitation.

Reviewer 9: I don't understand this - what does "take the event type into account of the relation" mean?

Reviewer 2: Right, so specifically, as part of #2677, it is still being debated whether the aggregation for `m.annotation` events should be grouped by, and contain the event `type` (mostly if not always `m.reaction`) or not. Relations are supposed to be encrypted, apart from their `m.relates_to` field, so their event type would in that case always be `m.room.encrypted`, which would render this grouping by event type less useful. I think the rationale is that annotations of a different type than `m.reaction` could be displayed in a different way by clients, but in practice we don't really have such a use case.

Less to the point, but also note that some if not all clients currently:
 - cheat and don't encrypt reactions at all
 - don't use server aggregation for reactions
 
More to the point, would this rewording make it more understandable? Or would you like the above rationale to be included in the MSC?
```suggestion
less useful for encrypted rooms. Aggregation algorithms that take the type of the relation events they aggregate into
account will suffer from the same limitation.
```

Reviewer 9: this new wording is much clearer. No need to include the whole rationale imho.

Reviewer 9: well, s/relation events/relating events/

Reviewer 2: Did this. :+1:

Upon receiving the remote echo for any relations, a client is likely to remove
the pending event from the send queue. Here, it should also de-aggregate the
pending event from the parent event's relations, and re-aggregate the received
remote event from `/sync` to make sure the local aggregation happens with the
same event data as on the server.

When adding a redaction for a relation to the send queue, the relation
referred to should be de-aggregated from the relations of the target of the
relation.  Similar to a relation, when the sending of the redaction fails or
is cancelled, the relation should be aggregated again.

To support creating relations for pending events, clients will need a way for
events to relate to one another before the `event_id` of the parent event is
known. When the parent event receives its remote echo, the target event id
(`m.relates_to`.`event_id`) of any relations in the send queue will need to be
set the newly received `event_id`.

Particularly, please remember to let users edit unsent messages (as this is a
common case for rapidly fixing a typo in a msg which is still in flight!)

## Edge cases

> How do you handle ignored users?

Reviewer 2: See discussion at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674#discussion_r451151436 as well

# MSC2675: Serverside aggregations of message relationships

It's common to want to send events in Matrix which relate to existing events -
for instance, reactions, edits and even replies/threads.

Clients typically need to track the related events alongside the original
event they relate to, in order to correctly display them.  For instance,
reaction events need to be aggregated together by summing and be shown next to
the event they react to; edits need to be aggregated together by replacing the
original event and subsequent edits; replies need to be indented after the
message they respond to, etc.

It is possible to treat relations as normal events and aggregate them
clientside, but to do so comprehensively could be very resource intensive, as
the client would need to spider all possible events in a room to find
relationships and maintain an correct view.

Instead, this proposal seeks to solve this problem by defining APIs to let the
server calculate the aggregations on behalf of the client, and so bundle the

> related events with the original event where appropriate.

Reviewer 4: It also defines an API to paginate through relations of an event, which seems to missing in this paragraph.

* This proposal defines APIs to let the server calculate the aggregations on
  behalf of the client, and so bundle the related events with the original
  event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.

## Proposal

### Receiving relations

#### Unbundled relation events

Relations are received during non-gappy incremental syncs (that is, syncs
called with a `since` token, and that have `limited: false` in the portion of
response for the given room) as normal discrete Matrix events.  These are
called "unbundled relation events".

#### Bundled relations

Other than during non-gappy incremental syncs, an aggregate view of relation
events should be bundled into the unsigned data of the event they relate to,
rather than sending un-bundled individual relation events.  This is called a
bundled relation (or bundled aggregation), and by sending a summary of the

> aggregations, avoids us having to always send lots of individual unbundled

Reviewer 4: Is it a bundled relation or a bundled aggregation? I find the terminology confusing that we seem to use both. We should choose one (probably "bundled aggregation").

Reviewer 9: big +1 to this. I spent a while being confused about what the difference between an "bundled aggregation" and "bundled relation" is.

Personally, I think "bundled aggregation" is too vague (aggregation of what?). The very fact it's being bundled implies the aggregation, and we should stick to calling it "bundled relation". 

But I don't mind too much so long as we pick one and stick to it rather than using them interchangably.

Reviewer 2: I understood that "bundled" referred to it being bundled with the target event, not that it "bundled" several relations together in an aggregation. I will stick to bundled aggregation (short for bundled relation aggregation if at some point we will aggregate something else) throughout the MSC.

Reviewer 4: It might help to define the term somewhere up-front, instead of in prose. But yeah, we need to stick to a single term. I don't think `aggregation` is ever really defined?

I've been referring to these internally in the Synapse code-base as "bundle relations", but I don't really care which we choose as long as we're consistent.

Reviewer 2: I've tried to clarify this. I'll let either of you have a look before resolving this.

relation events individually to the client.

Any API which receives events should bundle relations (apart from non-gappy
incremental syncs), for instance: initial sync, gappy incremental sync,
/messages and /context.

> The bundled relations are grouped according to their `rel_type`, and then
> paginated within each group using Matrix's defined pagination idiom of `count`,
> `limited` and `chunk` fields - respectively giving the total number of
> elements in the list, whether that list has been truncated, and an array of
> elements in the list.
> 
> The format of the aggregated value in the bundle depends on the relation type.

Reviewer 4: This seems to overly prescribe what happens with annotations and references, but is inaccurate for edits and threads.

It might be clearer to say to skip the bits about `chunk`/`count`, etc.

```suggestion
The bundled aggregations are grouped according to their `rel_type`. The format
of the aggregated value in the bundle depends on the relation type.
```

`m.reference` list the `event_id` and event `type` of the events which
reference that event.

The formats for other relation types may be defined in the proposals that
define the relation types.

For instance, the below example shows an event with five bundled relations:
three thumbsup reaction annotations, one replace, and one reference.

```json
{
    ...,
    "unsigned": {
        "m.relations": {
            "m.annotation": {
                "chunk": [
                  {
                      "type": "m.reaction",
                      "key": "👍",
                      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                      "count": 3
                  }
                ],
                "limited": false,

>                 "count": 1

Reviewer 2: Am I right to think that it would also set `next_batch` if there are more aggregations to be fetched using `/aggregations`? See https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/a19d01c3d95f5dbd3a4bb181cb70dacd44135a8b/synapse/storage/databases/main/relations.py#L216

>                 "count": 1

Reviewer 2: Getting the count would be somewhat valuable though for displaying purposes, before fetching the rest.

>                 "count": 1

Reviewer 2: went with what synapse does now, using `chunk` and `next_batch`.

not include events referenced by `m.reference` as stale, in favour of more
sophisticated pagination techniques in future. For instance:

```json
"!roomid:matrix.org": {
  "account_data": {},
  "ephemeral": {},
  "state": {},
  "summary": {},
  "timeline": {},
  "unread_notifications": {},
  "stale_events": {
    "m.annotations": {
      "chunk": [
        "$12345676321:matrix.org",
        "$12345321432:matrix.org"
      ],
      "limited": false
    }
  }
}
```

This shows that in the gappy sync response, a given room has two events prior
to the gap which received new annotations during the gap. Therefore if the
client has cached a local copy of those events, it should invalidate them, and
subsequently refresh them as needed.

To refresh events, we need an API to load arbitrary events from the room in
bulk, which the CS API doesn't currently provide.  We propose extending GET
`{roomId}/event/{eventId}` to accept a list of event IDs on the URL, e.g:

`POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/event`
```json
{
    "event_ids": [
        "$12345676321:matrix.org",
        "$12345321432:matrix.org"
    ]
}
```

...which returns an array of events with the given IDs.

>   XXX: Is this implemented in Synapse yet?

Reviewer 4: No, Synapse does not support fetching multiple events at once this way.

Reviewer 2: This has been removed since

#### Paginating relations and aggregations

A single event can have lots of associated relations, and we do not want to
overload the client by including them all in a bundle. Instead, we provide two
new APIs in order to paginate over the relations, which behave in a similar
way to `/messages`, except using `next_batch` and `prev_batch` names (in line
with `/sync` API). Clients can start paginating either from the earliest or
latest events using the `dir` param.

> The `/relations` API lets you iterate over all the **unbundled** relations

Reviewer 2: so does this mean that any relations of the returned events themselves are not included in bundled format? E.g. if `A` relates to `B` which relates to `C`, and you ask for `/relations/C`, will `B` include `A` as a bundled relation or not when returned?

Reviewer 4: Synapse does not currently include those, this was changed in matrix-org/synapse#5654. It seems the rationale is:

> {W]e don't allow relations to be applied to relations, so we return the original relations without any aggregations on top of them here.

The PR description notes that this is really because of edits:

> We [do not bundle relations] when pulling the relation events as well, because edits of edits are not something we'd like to support here.

This seems based on the request to include the original event in the `/relations` response (matrix-org/synapse#5595).

I don't think this is quite doing the right thing.

Reviewer 4: There's a current PR up for Synapse to change this behavior to be specific to annotation and edits. Pretty much stating that any relation which targets to an event which is an annotation/edit is invalid.

See #matrix-org/synapse#11284, this is somewhat described in MSC3440 but really should be here.

Reviewer 2: Ok, so if I understood correctly we're solving this by:
 - the CS api will refuse to send a relation targeting a m.replace or m.annotation. Do we care about the federation workaround here?
 - /relations will include bundled aggregations (which will be empty for m.replace and m.annotation relations as those can't be targeted)

Reviewer 2: I've added comments to #2676 and #2677 regarding the first point, regarding the second, I've added /relations to the list of endpoints that should bundle aggregations above. Is this sufficient to resolve this issue?

Reviewer: I think so? @clokep does the above seem reasonable to you?

Reviewer 4: I missed this thread, sorry. Got buried by GitHub's UI it seems.

I think your summary above makes sense. Punting the discussions of which sort of events those specific relations can target to the other MSCs makes sense. I think the current state of this MSC makes sense and we can treat those as exceptions in the other MSCs.

> associated with an event in standard topological order.  You can optionally

Reviewer 4: Note that there was a discussion at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440#discussion_r732607492 about how this can somewhat fail in federation since this API (as-is) only returns events known to the homeserver. This mostly comes about when a server joins a room (which it can see history of) and needs context in what the various relations flying around are to.

It might be OK to leave this to a future improvement, but we should probably mention it.

Reviewer 2: Copying the comment mentioned above here as the link doesn't work anymore:

Kegsay:

There are no server or federation considerations here which is a mistake. You're relying on [MSC2675](https://github.com/uhoreg/matrix-doc/blob/aggregations-helpers/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md) to aggregate thread replies but that has no federation handling at all. This means you will get incomplete thread replies over federation, making this feel flakey and unreliable. Consider cases like:
 - Server A in a big room, users make a thread and send a bunch of replies.
 - Server B joins the room. The server has no history other than the current state.
 - Users on Server A send a reply to a thread.
 - Clients on Server B are unable to work out what the root event is or the earlier replies are in this single-level deep thread. There's no mechanism to fetch the root event (`/context` doesn't work over federation) and there is no mechanism to fetch earlier replies in the DAG).

This behaviour may be acceptable when it is just reactions and losing a few don't really matter (controversial choice but okay). However, this is unacceptable when it comes to messages themselves. MSC2836 explores this topic and has a proposal to handle this:

> In an ideal world, every server would have the complete room DAG and would therefore be able to explore the full scope of a thread in a room. However, over federation, servers have an incomplete view of the room and will be missing many events. In absence of a specific API to explore threads over federation, joining a room with threads will result in an incomplete view.

filter by a given type of relation and event type:

```
GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/relations/{eventID}[/{relationType}[/{eventType}]]
```

```json
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "sender": "...",
      "content": { }
    }
  ],
  "next_batch": "some_token",
  "prev_batch": "some_token"
}
```

The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

  FIXME: we need to spell out that this API should return the original message
  when paginating over `m.replace` relations for a given message.  Synapse
  currently looks to include this as an `original_event` field alongside
  `chunk` on all relations, which feels very redundant when we only need it for
  edits.  Either we specialcase it for edits, or we just have the client go

>   call /event to grab the contents of the original?

Reviewer 9: Note that, per https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/10310, Synapse currently replaces the original event with the edit even when you call `/event` directly on the original. I'm pretty sure that's incorrect behaviour, but it would be great if the MSC could call out exactly which endpoints should return the original, and which should return the edited version.

Reviewer 5: As above - feels like maybe this ought to be in an `m.replace` MSC? Does someone have the con on updating it either way?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, will make a note in #2676 to mention this/deal with this. I agree, I don't think it belongs here.

> The `/aggregations` API lets you iterate over **bundled** relations, and within them.

Reviewer 4: I think this could be more explicit (and that the two forms of this API could use section headers:

```suggestion
The `/aggregations` API lets you iterate over **bundled** relations, and the
unbundled relations within them.
```

To iterate over the bundled relations for an event (optionally filtering by

> relation type and target event type):

Reviewer 9: This makes no sense. If we're iterating over the relations for an event, that implies they aren't bundled with the event.

Reviewer 2: AIUI, this would iterate over the aggregation groups of the relations, of which the layout depends on the rel_type. For `m.annotation`, the entries would be grouped by `key`.

Reviewer 2: e.g. as described here: https://github.com/uhoreg/matrix-doc/blob/aggregations-helpers/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md#bundled-relations

Reviewer 9: yes, but in this case, they aren't bundled with the event, right? So why are they called bundled relations (or bundled aggregations, or bundled anything?)

aren't they just the relations for an event?

Reviewer 9: indeed, apparently the whole point of this is that we *don't* want to bundle them:

> we do not want to overload the client by including them all in a bundle

Reviewer 2: So the idea is that the bundled aggregations are truncated if there are more than a certain amount, and using /aggregations allows you to paginate the rest. I've tried to clarify this since your comment, let me know if that resolves it.

Reviewer: @richvdh do the new changes clarify your concern here?

Reviewer 9: yup they seem to, thank you!

```

> GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/aggregations/{eventID}[/{relationType}][/{eventType}][?filter=id]

Reviewer 4: I might have missed it, but what is this `filter=id` referring to? Is it meant to refer to a [standard filter from the C-S API](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#filter)? I think some words mentioning that would be nice!

(Also, why would we only have the `/aggregations` endpoint accept this and not the `/relations` endpoint?)

Reviewer 4: I suspect this should just be removed, I'm not sure it makes sense and isn't implemented AFAIK.

```

```json
{
  "chunk": [
    {
      "type": "m.reaction",
      "key": "👍",
      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
      "count": 5,
    }
  ],
  "next_batch": "some_token",
  "prev_batch": "some_token"
}
```

The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

Trying to iterate over an relation type which does not use an aggregation key
(i.e. `m.replace` and `m.reference`) should fail with 400 and error

> M_INVALID_REL_TYPE.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`M_INVALID_REL_TYPE`.
```

Reviewer 4: This paragraph should probably be after the paragraph below this one, otherwise you're talking about an error state before describing the non-error state (which is confusing IMO).

Reviewer 2: The text has changed considerably since your comment, can you verify that the order isn't confusing anymore now?

event, ideally regardless of the parent event having an `event_id` already or
still being pending. If the client gives up on sending the relation for some
reason, the relation should be de-aggregated from the relations of the parent
event. If the client offers the user a possibility of manually retrying to
send the relation, it should be re-aggregated when the user does so.

De-aggregating a relation refers to rerunning the aggregation for a given
parent event while not considering the de-aggregated event any more.

Upon receiving the remote echo for any relations, a client is likely to remove
the pending event from the send queue. Here, it should also de-aggregate the
pending event from the parent event's relations, and re-aggregate the received
remote event from `/sync` to make sure the local aggregation happens with the
same event data as on the server.

When adding a redaction for a relation to the send queue, the relation
referred to should be de-aggregated from the relations of the target of the
relation.  Similar to a relation, when the sending of the redaction fails or
is cancelled, the relation should be aggregated again.

> To support creating relations for pending events, clients will need a way for

Reviewer 2: Have mentioned transaction_id now

events to relate to one another before the `event_id` of the parent event is
known. When the parent event receives its remote echo, the target event id
(`m.relates_to`.`event_id`) of any relations in the send queue will need to be
set the newly received `event_id`.

Particularly, please remember to let users edit unsent messages (as this is a
common case for rapidly fixing a typo in a msg which is still in flight!)

> ## Edge cases

Reviewer 4: An edge case that seems to be missing here is what to do if you lose access to a room after receive an event, for example:

alice and bob are in a room together. Alice sends event `A`,  `A` is annotated by event `B` (key = 🚢  ) from bob, alice leaves the room and history is not world visible. Bob annotates `A` with event `C` (key = 🚀 ). When alice requests event `A` should the bundled relations include results from both `B` and `C`? (Similar logic should be applied for the `/relations` and `/aggregations` API, I think.)

The opposite case also should probably be mentioned somewhere in this MSC, but I think is more straightforward:

If alice joins a room that does not have history visibility and receive events `Y` which annotates event `X`, what does that mean? (I think it means that there's an annotation that it can't resolve of the content of and tough luck, clients need to deal with that -- this is pretty much how we deal with quote replies currently.)

Reviewer 2: I'd be include to say that Alice should not see the :rocket: as it was sent while she was not in the room. Any reason to do it otherwise (e.g. server impl complexity)?

The opposite case, it would indeed be good to mention.

Reviewer 4: > I'd be include to say that Alice should not see the 🚀 as it was sent while she was not in the room. Any reason to do it otherwise (e.g. server impl complexity)?

I think for iterating over individual relations it should be quite doable. For aggregations it might be a bit harder. (But I agree that we shouldn't leak information about events the user can't access.)

Reviewer 5: Hmm, this does also imply that if Alice sends an event, Bob leaves the room, Alice edits the event and Bob rejoins, Bob should see the un-editied message, which doesn't feel right. Equally I think it would be confusing if people saw different reactions counts on a message in the situation you mention. I'd be more inclined to argue that visibility should be on the basis on whether you can see the parent event. Neither is really ideal for threads though...

Reviewer 4: Oh, that's a really weird one! One might argue that the most recent edit should always be shown (although that does depend on the server still being in the room).

Visibility of the original event is something that I thought about briefly, but it seemed odd for threads, and maybe for edits (as you point out).

Implementation wise it is definitely easier (and more cachable) if all users see the same "view" of the room's bundled events.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, not sure what to do here ... Not sure if that's what you're both saying or not but I think (too) that it makes sense that for `m.replace` and `m.annotation` relations, visibility depends on whether the target event is visible.

For `m.thread` relations, it feels like the actual `m.thread` relation should be visible to the user.

Should we specify that visibility depends on the relation type used and should be specified in the MSC defining the `rel_type`?

Reviewer 4: > Should we specify that visibility depends on the relation type used and should be specified in the MSC defining the `rel_type`?

Special-casing based on relation type is non-desirable as it adds complexity. I'd be curious if any one else has opinions on what to do here. I think the "easiest" thing is to just let the events be visible, even if they don't make much sense (e.g. seeing an annotation to an event you don't have access to).

Reviewer 3: I'm with Bruno.  For `m.replace` and `m.annotation` then visibility depends on the event they target.  But for `m.thread` it should be on the actual relation.  Yes, it makes the spec more complicated, but from a privacy perspective it's only the appraoch that makes sense.

Reviewer: Dependence on  the relation seems the right way to go, even if it does mean a new room version (as we have to change the history visibility rules, effectively). Note that this will also have an impact on encryption for clients which (currently) opt-in the premise of sending decryption keys to new, or recently new, members - they'll have to consider a case where the now-rejoined user will need keys for past relations as it might impact their visibility of the whole thing.

Reviewer 4: I guess if we made the changes we would want them to apply to e.g. `/sync` and such as well, which is why this would require changes to history visibility rules?

Do we need changes in this MSC for this or are we essentially saying the other relation MSCs need to discuss this?

Reviewer 2: > f we made the changes we would want them to apply to e.g. `/sync` and such as well, which is why this would require changes to history visibility rules?

Yeah, that's how I understand it too. Visibility rules apply to all CS API endpoints.

> Do we need changes in this MSC for this or are we essentially saying the other relation MSCs need to discuss this?

I've made changes to this MSC with the visibility changes, so I'm resolving this issue.

Reviewer 2: I've also added a section here what to do with relation events for which the target event is not visible to a user.

Reviewer 2: Rich made the good point this what is discussed here is too big of a scope creep this late in the game, so I have moved the visibility changes to #3570 . Note that threads don't depend on this as `m.thread` relations have the same visibility as other events.

How do you handle ignored users?
 * Information about relations sent from ignored users must never be sent to
   the client, either in bundled or unbundled form.  This is to let you block
   someone from harassing you with emoji reactions (or using edits as a
   side-channel to harass you).

What does it mean to call /context on a relation?
 * We should probably just return the root event for now, and then refine it in
   future for threading?

>  * XXX: what does synapse do here?

Reviewer 4: It does not look like Synapse has any special handling here (minus handling event edits, I think?)

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we should special case relations in /context tbh. At least not while we don't have a usecase for it. If you want the target event of a relation, you can easily get the event id from the relation and call /context on the parent. Shall I remove this edge case or add that we don't want to special case it for now?

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure why we would re-define `/context` for relations. I suppose it could do something like return the root event and other relations for it, but that's essentially what the `/relations` API does.

I agree this can be removed.

in the bundle depends on the relation type.

Some `rel_type`s might additionally group the aggregations by the `key` property
in the relation and aggregate to an array,
others might aggregate to a single object or any other value really.

##### Bundled aggregation

Relations are first and foremost normal matrix events, and are returned by all
endpoints that return events.
Other than during non-gappy incremental syncs, events that have other events
relate to it should additionally bundle the aggregation of those related events
in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  These are called
bundled aggregations, and by sending a summary of the relations,
avoids us having to always send lots of individual unbundled relation events
to the client.

Here's an example of what that can look like for some ficticious `rel_type`s:

```json
{
  "event_id": "abc",
  "unsigned": {
    "m.relations": {
      "some_rel_type": { "some_prop": true }, // aggregation for some_rel_type
      "other_rel_type": { "other_prop": false }, // aggregation for other_rel_type
    }
  }
}
```

The following client-server APIs should bundle aggregations

> with events they return:

Reviewer 6: Is there a way to opt out of this, i.e. using a filter option?

Reviewer 2: No, nothing like this is foreseen. Do you think there should be an option like this? If so, can you argue why there should be?

Reviewer 2: Actually, we're focusing on documenting the current implementations of this MSC here, so I don't think we'll want to add this option here. A future MSC would be more appropriate.

in the relation and aggregate to an array,
others might aggregate to a single object or any other value really.

Here are some non-normative examples of what aggregations can look like:

Example [`m.thread`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440) aggregation:
```
{
  "latest_event": {
    "content": { ... },
    ...
  },
  "count": 7,
  "current_user_participated": true
}
```

Example [`m.annotation`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) aggregation:
```
[
  {
      "key": "👍",
      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
      "count": 3
  },
  {
      "key": "👎",
      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
      "count": 2
  }
]
```

#### Bundled aggregations

Other than during non-gappy incremental syncs, timeline events that have other
events relate to them should include the aggregation of those related events
in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.  This process is
referred to as "bundling", and the aggregated relations included via
this mechanism are called "bundled aggregations".

By sending a summary of the relations, bundling
avoids us having to always send lots of individual relation events
to the client.

> Aggregations are never bundled into state events.

Reviewer 9: In reply to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675#discussion_r769469674:

> > why not?
>
> Because synapse doesn't implement this, see  see https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675#discussion_r760269297 . We're documenting the existing implementation(s), for better or worse.

I'm afraid the comment permalink doesn't work, but fair enough.

Could we have a sentence or footnote that records for future reference that this is a current implementation detail which could be revisited, rather than a specific design decision?

Reviewer 2: Did this

relation types could look like, and their MSCs might end up with
a different shape, so take these with a grain of salt.

```json
{
    ...,
    "unsigned": {
        "m.relations": {
            "m.replace": {
                "event_id": "$edit_event_id",
                "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                "sender": "@bruno1:localhost"
            },
            "m.reference": {
                "chunk": [
                    {
                        "event_id": "$some_event_id"
                    }
                ],
            },
            "m.annotation": {
                "chunk": [
                  {
                      "type": "m.reaction",
                      "key": "👍",
                      "origin_server_ts": 1562763768320,
                      "count": 3
                  }
                  "next_batch": "abc123",
                ]
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Querying aggregations

The `/aggregations` API lets you iterate over aggregations for the relations
of a given event.

To iterate over the aggregations for an event (optionally filtering by
relation type and relation event type):

```

> GET /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/{room_id}/aggregations/{event_id}/{rel_type}[/{event_type}][?from=token][&limit=amount]

Reviewer 9: Hrm, I hadn't realised that getting rid of the pagination stuff from `m.relations` meant also getting rid of this. That's probably the right call, but given synapse implements it, we still either need to spec it, or commit to disabling it in synapse. Do you know if it's used anywhere?

of a given event.

To iterate over the aggregations for an event (optionally filtering by

> relation type and relation event type):

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I've actually been trying to use the term "relation event" consistently throughout the relation MSCs. In MSC2674 one occurrence must have slipped as it does mention "relating event" once, whereas it uses "relation event" twice. I'd also say "relating event" is only meaningful in the context of the target event, which _is_ the case here, so I went with relating here but perhaps not everywhere?

> relation type and relation event type):

Reviewer 9: mmm ok, let's stick to "relation event". sorry for the noise!

The visibility rules (whether or not a user should receive a given event through
the client-server API) for relations events are adjusted in the MSC.
The visibility for relation events is dependent on the `rel_type`, with two options:
 
  - Visibility is derived from the visibility of the target event (the event
    referred to by the `event_id` in the relation); the relation should only be
    visible if the relation target is visible. This option means that events
    can still be visible to a user after they have left the room. This has implications
    for [End-to-end encryption](#end-to-end-encryption).
    [`m.replace`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) and [`m.annotation`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) relation events have this visilibilty, see those respective MSCs.
  - Visibility is the same as a non-relation event.
    [`m.thread`](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440) relation events have this visilibilty, see the respective MSC.

Visibility derived from the visibility of the target event is the default;
if the MSC introducing the relation type doesn't specify any other visibility this is assumed.

> The change of visilibilty rules will require a new room version.

Reviewer 9: this is a *huge* scope change to throw in this late in the MSC process! If we want to change the way visibility works, please can it be a new MSC explaining the changes in more depth?

Reviewer 2: Ok, fair point, and sorry for the mess. I've moved this to MSC3570 now.

    }
  ],
  "next_batch": "some_token",
}
```

The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

The `from` and `limit` query parameters are used for pagination, and work

> just like described for the `/messages` endpoint.

Reviewer 9: my understanding (correct me if I'm wrong) is that in the case of `/relations`, the `from`,`to`,`next_batch` and `prev_batch` are pagination tokens as retuned by `/sync` and `/messages`, which means it does make sense to request the relations in a specific timeline window, as well as going forwards and backwards.

(which is to say, `/relations` works much more like `/messages` does than `/aggregations`).

If my understanding is correct, we should probably make it explicit that it's ok to use tokens returned by `/sync` and `/messages` here - but also you should probably reinstate `to` and `prev_batch`.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, this is not my understanding. I understood it as:
 - to get the first page, you omit `from` but set a `limit`
 - use the `next_batch` token from the previous page to as the `from` parameter for the next request.

Hence I'd still think we don't need bidirectional pagination.

Perhaps @clokep can confirm this is how it is implemented? If it is, we should mention this explicitly.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, so seems my understanding was somewhat off. I'll apply Rich' suggestions then :+1:

}
```

> ### End to end encryption

Reviewer 2: Aggregating annotations currently requires the event type of the relation event. This would mean the event type also should be provided in the plaintext somehow...

Reviewer 2: I've documented this limitation for the new endpoints. The limitation for annotations should be documented in #2677

## Edge cases

### Ignore relation events for which the target is not visible to us.

> Clients should ignore relation events for which the target event is

Reviewer 9: s/relation events/relating events/

> not visible to them.

Reviewer 2: It was brought up by cl0pek as something that would be good to document. Would you be more comfortable if it said "can" rather than "should"?

> not visible to them.

Reviewer 9: yes. Or "In general, clients can safely ignore relation events where the target event is unknown to them." ?

> not visible to them.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, "unknown" seems a bit ambiguous. For example, when a client is backfilling, it will often first see the relations and then the target event. In this case, clients doing local aggregation will still need keep track of the relations somewhere for when they find the target event. Perhaps this is enough reason to remove this whole paragraph as it is not super clear how to distinguish between a target event that is invisible to you and one that you haven't backfilled yet. So will remove :+1:
